“He will crush your head.”
That was Jehovah speaking to the serpent
—really, to Satan.
And God-fearing people who have understood
the prophecy of Genesis 3:15
have been hanging on to those words
for a long time
because we long to see
the complete elimination of Satan
and his influence from our lives.
Can we fully imagine what life will be like
once Satan and the demons
are out of the picture?
How much influence do they have on us
and our thinking right now?
If you open Watchtower Library
and go to the
Watchtower Publications Index 1986-2016
under the subject “Satan,”
you will find a subheading entitled
“methods of operation on humans.”
It lists 56 devices that he uses
to trip us up mentally, emotionally,
morally, and spiritually.
Likely you see things in the list
that you have had to contend with
or are contending with even now:
discouragement,
entertainment, family opposition,
intimidation, personal differences,
ridicule, temptations.
With each of these,
the Index  provides
references to our publications
where we can find helpful encouragement
and Scriptural principles
to deal with whatever is threatening us.
Well, let’s talk about two
of Satan’s methods that were on the list,
starting with one
that was near the top of the list:
convincing people
of being unloved or worthless.
The Devil would have us believe
that from God’s standpoint
we are unlovable and unforgivable.
He wants us to worry about our past mistakes,
become overly self-critical,
and underestimate
Jehovah’s compassion and forgiveness.
But Satan is just taking
the spotlight off of himself
because he is the one
who is unlovable in God’s eyes
and who is really unforgivable.
Now, how do we combat
this method of Satan’s to dishearten us?
Well, one thing is that we can remember:
“It is impossible for God to lie.”
So take to heart
what Jehovah has written truthfully
in the Bible about his love for us.
As an example,
please turn to Romans chapter 8,
and keep your Bibles open there, if you will.
It’s Romans chapter 8.
We’re going to read verses 33 and 34:
“Who will file accusation
against God’s chosen ones?
“God is the One who declares them righteous.
“Who will condemn them?
“Christ Jesus is the one who died,
“yes, more than that,
the one who was raised up,
who is at the right hand of God
and who also pleads for us.”
Now, those words were addressed
to spirit-anointed Christians,
but, in principle,
they also apply to those of the other sheep
who are declared righteous as God’s friends.
So do Satan’s false accusations
really matter?
No.
It is Jehovah
who declares true Christians righteous
based on their faith
in the sacrifice of Christ.
And, really, why would Jehovah
stop loving his worshippers
after he has given them
the most precious gift he possibly could
—his own beloved son
who even now “pleads for us” with God?
Well, let’s keep reading in Romans chapter 8,
continuing with verses 38 and 39:
“For I am convinced
that neither death nor life nor angels
“nor governments nor things now here
“nor things to come nor powers
“nor height nor depth nor any other creation
“will be able to separate us from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
No one, including Satan,
can successfully challenge
God’s favorable judgment
of his devoted servants.
Now, a second thing we can do
to combat this method
of the Devil’s to dishearten us
is to remember
that Satan is a malicious liar.
The truth is not in him,
so we have to reject his lying accusations.
A reference listed in the Index
tells of how a traveling overseer
addresses this issue.
He asks downhearted ones,
“Do you believe in the Trinity?”
And the discouraged one would say,
“Of course not,”
realizing that’s one of Satan’s lies.
Then the brother would ask,
“Do you believe in hellfire?”
Again comes the answer,
“Of course not.”
So the brother tells them
that there is another satanic lie
that’s usually not recognized as such
—the lie that Jehovah
does not love us as individuals.
And that approach often gets positive results
in helping the person
to recognize and reject Satan’s lie
that we are unloved
or worthless in God’s eyes.
So we need to take Jehovah at his word.
He is the one who tells the truth,
and he wants us to believe
that he loves us individually.
Another method
that was in that list in the Index
that Satan uses
to deceive people is propaganda.
That is false, biased,
or deceptive information
used to manipulate the way we think.
The first reference
shown in the Index  for propaganda
is an article in The Watchtower
that we are currently studying
—an article entitled
“Winning the Battle for Your Mind.”
And it begins:
“You are under attack!
“And your chief enemy, Satan,
is using a very dangerous weapon against you.
“What is it?
“Propaganda!
A weapon specially designed to attack,
not your body, but your mind.”
Satan can use any part
of his wicked system of things
to disseminate his lies.
And his objective
is to weaken our faith and morals,
to stir up contentions between us,
and to undermine our confidence
in the leadership that God is providing us.
How can we resist?
The article says:
“Jesus gave this simple rule
“for combating propaganda:
‘Know the truth,
and the truth will set you free.’”
In the Bible,
we can find all we need
to combat Satan’s propaganda,
provided we’re diligent
in “carefully examining the Scriptures daily”
and we use our God-given abilities
and power of reason
to make the truth our own.
Now, the second thing we can do
to combat this method of the Devil’s
is to keep in mind
that Satan does not want us
to think clearly or reason things out well.
So never be content passively
to blindly accept
what you hear from politicians,
the news media, the Internet,
because Satan is the master of fake news.
And the article concludes:
“Have you ever watched a film in which,
“from your vantage point in the audience,
“you can clearly see that someone
is being deceived and manipulated?
“Did you find yourself thinking:
“‘Do not believe it! They are lying to you!’
“Imagine, then, the angels
shouting the same message to you:
“‘Do not be fooled by Satan’s lies!’
“Shut your ears, then, to Satan’s propaganda.
Listen to Jehovah and trust in him.”
Now, all satanic influence
will be gone when Satan is bound
and hurled into the abyss
for a thousand years.
And what a relief it will be
to live in a world totally free
from his wicked influence.
But then he’ll be released from the abyss
for a short while for a final test.
What method will he use then to deceive us
—one of the 56 devices
we saw earlier in the list
or some new diabolical trick
that he has thought of?
Well, we don’t know.
But we do know
that if we remember that he is the liar
and Jehovah is the truth-teller,
we should fare just fine.
Let’s go back to Paul’s letter to the Romans,
where he echoes the first Bible prophecy
at Romans 16:20
—Romans 16:20:
“For his part, the God who gives peace
will crush Satan under your feet shortly.”
Rather than being merely abyssed,
Satan will actually
be completely annihilated.
The Revelation Climax  book says:
“This is more than a superficial bruising.
“. . . Paul here used a Greek word,
“. . . that means
to bruise into a jellylike state,
to trample down,
to destroy utterly by crushing.”
And the “God’s Love”  book says:
“With Satan . . . out of the way,
you will feel relief
that may be hard to fathom now.”
Meanwhile,
whenever wrong or negative thoughts
creep into our mind,
we need to reject Satan’s lies
and focus our mind
on the truths that Jehovah has taught us.